Hello, hello, hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English, the show
where you can listen to fascinating
stories and learn weird and wonderful
things about the world at the same
time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today it’s
part three, the final part, of our
mini-series on the Years of Lead.
In case you missed them, in part one,
we set the scene and talked about
the Piazza Fontana bombing and the
early years of this tumultuous period.
In part two, we talked about the Red
Brigades and the kidnapping and murder
of the former Prime Minister, Aldo Moro.
And today, we are going to bring it to
a close with the most deadly event of
the entire period: The Bologna bombing.
If you haven’t listened to parts
one and two yet, I’d recommend
listening to those first, as I’ll be
referencing quite a bit from that.
So, let’s not waste a minute
and get right into it.
There are many wonderful things
about the city of Bologna: fantastic
food, a beautiful centre, a famous
university and a vibrant cultural scene.
One area where Bologna doesn’t
score so highly, however, at least
compared to other Italian cities,
is its weather, its climate.
It’s in the Po valley, surrounded
by mountains on all sides.
This means winters can be cold and
damp, and in summer, it’s hot, humid and
sticky, making it pretty uncomfortable.
Fortunately, the sea isn’t so far
away, and in the summer months, a
fair portion of the city piles into
cars, buses and trains, heading
east towards the Adriatic coast.
August 1980 was particularly
hot and unpleasant.
And on the Saturday of the first weekend
of August, Saturday the 2nd, thousands
of people were piling into the train
station, no doubt looking forward
to a refreshing day by the sea, away
from the stifling heat of the city.
The station waiting room was jam-packed:
families, children, grandparents,
people from all walks of life.
None of them would catch
their train that day.
At precisely 10.25 am, there
was a huge explosion that ripped
through the train waiting room.
The roof collapsed.
Windows were blown to smithereens.
Cars overturned.
The entire area around the
station covered in dust.
According to eyewitness accounts,
in the immediate aftermath,
there was an eerie silence.
Then came the groans and
wails from under the rubble.
The shrieks of horror as people found
the lifeless bodies of loved ones.
Then the sound of police
and ambulance sirens.
In total, 85 people were killed,
and more than 200 were wounded.
Initially, it was thought to have been an
explosion of a gas pipe in the station,
a tragic but innocent maintenance error.
Shortly afterwards, it became clear it
was something altogether more sinister.
The cause was 23kg of explosives
that had been placed in a suitcase
in the waiting room, on a timer.
It would go down as the deadliest
terrorist attack not only of the
Years of Lead, but also has the grim
distinction of being the deadliest
terrorist attack in Italian history.
And to make matters worse, nobody
has ever formally admitted to it,
and many people believe that the
true culprits have never been found.
It is, like the Piazza Fontana bombing
and the kidnapping of Aldo Moro
before it, one of those incidents
where there is an official verdict,
a legally guilty party, but there
is a common belief that the whole
story has never really come to light.
So, let us remind ourselves a little bit
about the Years of Lead up to this point.
By the summer of 1980, Italy
had lived through more than a
decade of political violence.
It had started, as we talked
about in part one, with the
Piazza Fontana bombing in 1969.
That attack opened a grim new chapter
in Italian history, where political
violence became an almost daily reality.
There were clashes in the streets,
bombs on trains, shootings, and
kidnappings, and by the mid-1970s,
Italy was experiencing hundreds of
acts of political violence every year.
Then came the kidnapping and
murder of Aldo Moro in 1978,
which we explored in part two.
Moro’s death marked a turning point.
The dream of the “historic compromise”
between the Christian Democrats
and the Communists collapsed.
The Red Brigades, who had staged
the kidnapping, believed they were
striking a blow against the state,
but instead they found themselves
increasingly isolated, hunted down by
police, and losing public sympathy.
And within a few years, they
would be completely dismantled.
But that didn’t mean the violence stopped.
If anything, it shifted shape.
On the far left, there were still
extremist groups carrying out targeted
assassinations, mostly against judges,
journalists, and business leaders.
On the far right, neofascist organisations
continued their strategy of bombings,
aiming to create fear and instability,
to push Italy towards authoritarian rule.
As you may recall, this was part of what
later came to be called the strategy of
tension: the belief that terrorism itself
could be used, or tolerated by elements
of the state, to push Italy away from
the left and towards authoritarian rule.
So by 1980, Italy was a country still
deeply scarred, still fearful, still
accustomed to waking up to headlines
about kidnappings, bombs and bloodshed.
Yet nothing could have prepared
it for the horror of Bologna.
See, despite the almost daily
political violence, this was
typically violence against policians
or people in positions of power.
Or between rival political groups;
the left against the right, and
in fact much more frequently,
the right against the left.
Of course, these are generalisations, and
you’d also have factions on both sides
even fighting each other, but the point is
that the violence wasn’t typically against
“civilians”, regular, ordinary people.
Bologna was different; it didn’t target
politicians, judges, or symbols of
power, it was aimed squarely at ordinary
people: families, children, pensioners,
holidaymakers waiting for trains.
It wasn’t just another strike in
Italy’s political war; it was an
attack on Italian society itself.
As you can imagine, in the hours
and days after the explosion,
Bologna became a city of grief.
The President travelled to
the city almost immediately.
He walked among the rubble of the
station, spoke to the wounded in
hospitals, and delivered an emotional
appeal for unity against terrorism.
Pertini, the President, was an old
partisan fighter, a man who had resisted
Mussolini, and his presence gave a
sense of dignity to the mourning.
The funerals were held in Bologna’s
Piazza Maggiore, the great
square at the heart of the city.
Thousands upon thousands of people
stood in silence, clutching photographs,
waving black flags, demanding justice.
But justice for whom?
No group has ever claimed responsibility
for the attack, and the list of potential
culprits, well it was depressingly long.
On the far left, the Red Brigades
had not yet been completely crushed,
and their willingness to kill for
political ends, well after Aldo Moro,
that was evident for anyone to see.
On the far right, neofascist groups had
carried out a string of bombings in Milan
and Brescia, and even attacks on trains.
Almost immediately, the finger
of blame was pointed in both
these very different directions.
Some officials and newspapers suggested
leftist anarchists must be responsible,
as they had done after Piazza Fontana.
For many, especially after Aldo
Moro just two years before, the
idea that anarchists were behind
Bologna seemed to fit perfectly.
But there was no evidence
linking them to the attack.
Attention soon shifted to the far
right, in particular to a group known
as the Nuclei Armati Rivoluzionari, or
NAR for short, the Armed Revolutionary
Nuclei, as they’re called in English.
This was a violent neofascist
organisation, formed by young
extremists who rejected mainstream
politics and embraced terror.
They had links to older neo-fascist
movements and were already suspected
of earlier attacks, and their
fingerprints were all over Bologna.
But the investigation was
messy from the very beginning.
Files disappeared.
Evidence was mishandled.
Suspects slipped through the cracks.
Two people were eventually
convicted of the bombing: Valerio
Fioravanti and Francesca Mambro.
In Fioravanti’s case, he was sentenced
to 10 consecutive life sentences plus
250 years in prison, but he ended up only
serving a fraction of that; he was allowed
out on day release in the year 2000, and
has been a completely free man since 2009.
Even for Italy’s famously forgiving
justice system, this was a remarkably
short stint in prison, given the gravity
of the crimes he was convicted of.
Now, for their part, Fioravanti and Mambro
have always maintained their innocence.
They admit to their involvement with
NAR, having been far-right activists and
being behind other attacks, but say that
they weren’t responsible for Bologna.
So if Valerio Fioravanti and
Francesca Mambro had nothing to do
with it, or if they were too young
and unconnected to have been able to
do it alone, who else was behind it?
Well, again, this is where it's easy to
go down rabbit hole after rabbit hole
of Years of Lead conspiracy theories,
which lead to masonic lodges, the
mafia, Gladio, the “stay behind” NATO
operation, and even to Carlos The Jackal,
the Venezuelan political terrorist.
See, the more the investigation unfolded,
the less clear things seemed to become.
Judges complained of obstruction from
within the Italian secret services.
Evidence went missing, false leads were
planted, and witnesses were intimidated.
It was as if someone wanted
the truth buried under the
rubble of Bologna’s station.
And the evidence from earlier
attacks suggested that this
was not just a paranoid theory.
By this time, investigations into
the Piazza Fontana bombing and
others had uncovered links between
far-right terrorists and elements
of the Italian secret services.
There were cases where extremists were
tipped off before arrests, or evidence was
destroyed to throw judges off the scent.
And the Bologna bombing fit
perfectly into this dark pattern.
So when judges pointed to NAR as the
culprits, and later on, when Fioravanti
and Mambro were released after only
serving a small portion of their sentence,
many Italians were left wondering.
Were Fioravanti and
Mambro really behind it?
Were they simply pawns in a larger game?
The investigation into the Bologna
bombing has dragged on for decades.
Fioravanti and Mambro had been
in custody since 1981, the
year following the bombing.
It took until 1988 for them,
along with several other members
of the NAR, to be sentenced.
But, still, this wasn’t the end of it.
There were also convictions of secret
service officials for obstruction
of justice, accused of deliberately
derailing the investigation.
Appeals, retrials, and new
verdicts followed for years.
Even into the 2000s and 2010s, courts
continued to re-examine evidence, uncover
hidden documents, and issue new rulings.
The result was a long, confusing
judicial saga that left many
Italians unconvinced that the
full truth had ever come to light.
Now, if you take a train from Bologna
train station today, you might not
immediately see any sign that this
was not so long ago the site of
Italy’s most deadly terrorist attack.
But if you look up at the
clock, you’ll notice something.
It is stuck at precisely 10.25
am, the very moment of the blast.
Somehow, the original clock wasn’t
completely destroyed; it remained stuck
there, forever frozen in time, like the
85 people who lost their lives that day.
If there is anything good to be taken
from this tragedy, it’s that it marked
the worst point of The Years of Lead.
There were still isolated killings
throughout the 1980s, but the
era of constant bombings and
spectacular acts of terror was over.
After the best part of two decades,
political violence–both by the right
and the left–had failed to achieve
its stated goals, and public support
on both sides was at all-time lows.
But the shadow of those
years still hangs over Italy.
The violence left scars: deep mistrust
of institutions, a political culture
where conspiracy theories thrive, and
a lingering sense that the state has
not told its people the full story.
And as for Italian politics today?
The Christian Democrats, which had
dominated the country during the Years
of Lead, no longer exist as a party.
The Communist Party, once the
largest in the West, is also gone.
And the Italian political scene
is not much less fragmented.
There were 15 different political parties
in the 2022 election, the most popular
of which was Fratelli d’Italia, a party
with roots in the post-fascist right.
And of course, this is all very
recent stuff: Giorgia Meloni, almost
every member of her government,
and any Italian over the age of 45
was alive during the Years of Lead.
So, these memories, whether they
are first-hand from people who were
teenager activists during the Years
of Lead, or, like Meloni, their
memories are likely second-hand, from
parents and older relatives, well
they are still fresh, and are part
of the political DNA of modern Italy.
Now, to wrap up Bologna, and indeed
this entire mini-series, it’s very
easy to visit Italy and get distracted
by the beautiful city centres,
art, history, and restaurants.
You probably don’t think of bombs,
kidnappings, and murder, or if you
do, it’s in the context of organised
criminals, not political actors.
The story of The Years of Lead isn’t very
often told outside Italy, but it is as
fascinating as it is confusing and murky.
It’s hard to understand, partly because
there was no clear, unifying, villain.
There wasn’t a single external, foreign
enemy plotting to destroy Italy.
The violence came from within, by people
who were convinced that they were acting
in the best interests of their country.
The bombers, the kidnappers, the police,
the politicians — they all believed, in
some warped way, that they were defending
the Republic, protecting freedom, fighting
for workers’ rights, or preserving order.
It is perhaps a reminder that when
it comes to political violence,
there are rarely any winners.
OK, then, that is it for today's
episode on the Bologna bombings,
and with that comes an end to this
three-part mini-series on this
fascinating but haunting period of
Italian history, the years of lead.
If you’ve made it this far, let me tell
you something that might be interesting.
I spent quite a lot of my last year
at university studying this period,
and my professor was a guy called John
Foot, who is, incidentally, probably
the best-known English-language
historian on the Years of Lead.
I never imagined that the courses
I did would have any practical use,
but almost 20 years later, they
were more useful than I thought.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.